+++
title = "HackEurope 2026: A short rant on AI and hackathons"
+++

HackEurope is over. In many ways, it was a complete shitshow (vibe coded
inaccessible UI for participants, lots of delays, miscommunications, and other
issues too many to list). But now that the caffeine overdose and sleep
deprivation is over, I can say that there were actually some important lessons.

TL;DR:

1. Front-end is almost everything. There is 0 burden of proof that your project
   is actually functional or that it has any practical application. As long as
   it looks cool, investors and non-technical people will eat that up.

2. Choose your track wisely. Make sure that the track sponsor IS ACTUALLY AT
   YOUR LOCATION. Most people were under the impression that tracks were
   per-country when in fact there was a single €1000 prize shared across the 3
   countries and the sponsor wasn't actually operating in some.

3. Choose a problem that is easy to explain. There were 2 minutes to explain. It
   is a losing game whether or not you explain context. Non-technical people
   will tune out confused regardless. We were extremely lucky with 2/3 of the
   evaluators actually knowing about open-source supply chain attacks and being
   excited about our solution.

4. Follow the trends. All winners had "AI" as a significant part of their
   solution.

That being said, I personally wouldn't follow my own advice. I went in with the
goal of building something that I would want to maintain long term. Not just AI
slop (I fucking hate Lovable).

<!--

## So what did we actually build?

### Context

Over the past year, we've had all sort of supply chain attacks. From the
Shai-Hulud worm to Notepad++ being hacked. Developers are the most vulnerable.
Most people install packages with no verification whatsoever. Meanwhile,
$BIGCORPs hire expensive security teams with manual reviews that take forever.
Lots of time wasted and duplicate work done between companies.

(Common misunderstandings: No, we're not looking at CVEs or vulnerabilities.
Lots of companies like Snyk or Wiz already do that. There are valid times to use
insecure but non-malicious software such as for internal tooling)

### The MVP

So what our MVP was is basically a secure package registry that you simply
`npm config set` and used in place of NPM. We take packages from NPM and
generate a series of tests that would usually trigger malicious behaviors (if
any). We then collect a bunch of behavioral data using eBPF (like file accesses,
DNS, network connections, executed commands, etc.). This is a lot of data, and
we increase the signal to noise ratio by deduplicating based on a known set of
safe behavior collected from another real package. From that, we can either use
"AI" (of course we had to plug that in somewhere. It was the theme of the
hackathon lol) or historical data to determine whether that behavior is
malicious or at least anomalous. If everything is clear, it gets uploaded to our
"secure" registry.

There is still a lot to work on. There are quite a few features we're also
working on:

- Reproducible builds
- Derivative of behavioral changes across time to determine the "normal" amount
  of deviance
- Supporting PyPi, Maven, Cargo, and other ecosystems
- Automatic tracing of behavior to source (line of code, commit introduced, etc.
  Reverse engineering if necessary).
- Matching registry releases to exact source code commits
- Use [`eCapture`](https://github.com/gojue/ecapture) to decrypt HTTPS
- Have honeypot data to catch exfiltration attempts

I've been working on a much larger system over the past few months that tries to
solve supply chain security. The task now is to take the shit code written
during the hackathon and integrate the reusable parts.

If you have any comments, or just interested in general, pop me an
[email](mailto:acheong@duti.dev).

-->

## AI encourages conformity and kills creativity

A solid 90% of the projects there were just vibe coded slop. Even the ideas were
AI. You can tell when multiple people implemented the exact same idea with the
exact same title, description, and implementation.

While people call me a luddite, I do not particularly hate AI as a tool. My
problem is that it has significantly lowered the bar for certain project types
and therefore incentivize people who would have otherwise built something cool
to instead fit into a mold constrained by the capabilities of AI.

A lot of cool ideas are out of distribution from the training data, and those
rarely show up at hackathons anymore. The AI says they're "too hard" and people
simply avoid these.

The grand winner was an idea to use LLMs for predicting wildfires caused by
lightning strikes, and subsequently using LLMs to orchestrate drones to do cloud
seeding and prevent wildfires. Cool UI and all, but there was (at least from
observation), nothing actually behind it.

In a now edited post by Anthropic's head of Startup Sales, he mentioned that the
winning team (LLM cloud seeding) had only 1 software engineer and 3
non-technicals. The accessibility is cool to see, but it is not expected at all
for any of these projects to exist long-term. Just a marketing stunt to claim
that code is now a commodity.

It feels like hackathons used to be a place where real startups are made or at
least a proxy for the ability of individuals. Now, with everything being
front-end only demos, there is no expectation at all for any follow up, and
nothing is said of ability except for pitching and trend chasing.

Some other funny ideas I saw:

- Stopping AI prompt injecting by scanning every prompt with an LLM (there were
  multiple duplicates of this)
- Using LLMs to control satellites and move them when a Russian satellite gets
  too close (winner)
- "Palantir for tech teams". "A real-time security guardian sitting silently on
  every dev's machine, scanning their screen, code, and communications to
  proactively prevent vulnerabilities."
